OSI model
7.Application - works with applications
6.Presentation - translates data into a standardized format, handles encryption, compression and other transformations of data
5.Session - maitain session if connec tion is setup, session- unique, tracks communication.
4.Transport - chooses between and TCP and UDP, divides transmission up into bite-sized pieces.
3.Network - to locate destination.
2.Data Link - physical addressing of transmission, present data in a suitable format for transmission. error detection
1.Physical - electric pulses that make up the data, convert binary data to signals

Encapsulation and De-encapsulaton
header added at each layer
provides an extra layer of security.

TCP/IP model
Application
Transport
Internet
Network Interface
These 4 is official, defined in RFC 1122
was introduced before OSI model

Ping
to test connection
uses ICMP protocol (in network layer)
Ex:
ping google.com
switches:
-i      ( change interval of sent ping requests )
-4      ( IPv4 only )
-v      ( verbose )

Traceroute
path to reach destination   (uses UDP protocol on Unix)
Ex:
traceroute google.com 
tracert  ( in windows )  uses ICMP protocol
switches:
-i      ( to specify an interface )
-T      ( to use TCP SYN requests )

Whois
to know who has registered a domain name
personal details are redacted in Europe, but can get more info from other places
whois <domain>
ex:
whois bbc.co.uk
web version : www.whois.com/whois

Dig
URL to IP : source -> recursive DNS server -> root name server -> Top-level domain servers -> Authoritative name servers
sees local cache first, if not found, will send to recursive DNS server (automatically known to router). 
recursive DNS server will check its cache, if not found, sends to root name server. 
total:13 root name servers. these keep track of DNS servers in next level down called Top-level domain servers.
TLD servers are split into extensions (.com, .co.uk,). TLD servers keep track of next level down servers, called authoritative name servers
Authoritative name servers - used to store DNS records for domain directly. Every domain in the world will have its DNS records stored on an Authoritative name server somewhere.
dig - to manually query recursive DNS servers 
dig <domain> @<dns-server-ip>
ex:
dig google.com @1.1.1.1
dig gives TTL also   (measured in seconds)
